<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Sparser - Universal Parser</title>
        <link href="https://sparser.io" rel="canonical" type="application/xhtml+xml"/>
        <!--link href="https://sparser.io/favicon.ico" rel="icon"
            type="image/x-icon"/>
        <link href="css/index.css?1548574245046" media="all" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
        <link href="images/apple-touch-icon-57.png" rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="57x57"/>
        <link href="images/apple-touch-icon-72.png" rel="apple-touch-icon" sizes="72x72"/>
        <link href="images/apple-touch-icon-114.png" rel="apple-touch-icon"
            sizes="114x114"/>
        <link href="images/apple-touch-icon-144.png" rel="apple-touch-icon"
            sizes="144x144"/-->
        <meta content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" name="viewport"/>
        <meta content="index, follow" name="robots"/>
        <meta content="Sparser - Universal Parser" name="DC.title"/>
        <meta content="#fff" name="theme-color"/>
        <meta content="Austin Cheney" name="author"/>
        <meta
            content="Sparser is a programming language parsing utility that can interpret many different languages using a single simple data model."
            name="description"/>
        <meta content="Global" name="distribution"/>
        <meta content="en" http-equiv="Content-Language"/>
        <meta content="application/xhtml+xml;charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
        <meta content="blendTrans(Duration=0)" http-equiv="Page-Enter"/>
        <meta content="blendTrans(Duration=0)" http-equiv="Page-Exit"/>
        <meta content="text/css" http-equiv="content-style-type"/>
        <meta content="application/javascript" http-equiv="content-script-type"/>
        <!--meta content="qL8AV9yjL2-ZFGV9ey6wU3t7pTZdpD4lIetUSiNen7E"
            name="google-site-verification"/-->
        <meta content="#bbbbff" name="msapplication-TileColor"/>
        <style type="text/css">
        html{margin:0;padding:0}
        body{background:#eee;font-size:10px;margin:0;position:relative;overflow-x:hidden}
        h1,
        h2{font-family:Georgia, "Times New Roman", Times, serif;font-variant:small-caps;font-weight:normal;line-height:normal}
        #top_menu{background:#333;border-color:#000;border-style:node node solid;border-width:0 0 0.1em;box-shadow:0em 0.25em 1em #666;color:#fff;padding:1em;position:fixed;width:100%;z-index:6}
        #top_menu ul{float:right;list-style-position:inside;padding:0}
        #top_menu li{float:right;list-style:none}
        #top_menu h1{float:left;font-size:2em;margin:0}
        #top_menu a{color:#fff}
        #content{background:#fff;border-color:#666;border-style:none solid;border-width:0 0.1em;box-shadow:0.5em 0.5em 2em #666;margin:0 auto;max-width:100em;padding:5em 1em 1em;position:relative;z-index:5}
        #content h1{font-size:10em;margin:0;text-align:center}
        #content h1 span{display:block;font-size:0.35em}
        #content h2{font-size:2.5em;margin:1em 0 0}
        #content p,
        #content li{font-size:1.4em;font-family:"Palatino Linotype", Georgia, "Times New Roman", Times, serif}
        #content p{}
        #content li{}
        #blobs{height:100%;left:0;position:fixed;top:0;width:100%}
        #blobs div{display:block;position:absolute}
        #blobs div span{border-radius:50%;display:block;opacity:0.25}
        .clear{clear:both;display:block;height:0.01em}
        </style>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div id="top_menu">
            <h1>Sparser</h1>
            <ul>
                <li><a href="docs-html/tech-documentation.xhtml">Documentation</a></li>
                <li><a href="https://github.com/unibeautify/sparser">Github</a></li>
                <li><a href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/sparser">NPM</a></li>
            </ul>
            <span class="clear"></span>
        </div>
        <div id="content">
            <h1>Sparser<span>The Universal Parser</span></h1>
            <h2>License</h2>
            <p><a href="license">Creative Commons Zero v1.0 Universal (cc0-1.0)</a></p>
            <h2>The So What</h2>
            <p>Sparser is a language parser created to provide a simple data format that may accurately describe any language. This universal nature is achieved through two realizations:</p>
            <ol>
                <li><strong>Languages are composed of structures.</strong> A structure is a logical grouping that is typically defined by a language through syntax and sometimes by context. A simple scheme that identifies the atomic particles of a language by structure is sufficient to describe the language. That simple scheme is what allows Sparser to describe different languages equally and universally.</li>
                <li><strong>Descriptions of language structures are universally extensible.</strong> Language structures are not flat. One structure may include other child structures. Those child structures may be of a different grammar, syntax, or language from the parent structure. A universal description of language structure allows complex documents, which are documents composed of more than one language, to be described as a single parsed data structure.</li>
            </ol>
        </div>
        <div id="blobs">
            <div></div>
        </div>
        <script type="application/javascript" src="js/website.js"></script>
    </body>
</html>
